In this week's Parsha, Parshat Ha'azinu, Moshe on the last day of his life delivers a final poem to the Jewish people, recapping the entire relationship between Hashem and the Children of Israel. He presses them for the last time to remember Hashem and follow His commandments.

At the end of this poem, Moshe essentially summarizes the entire message he has been trying to impart to the Jewish People for the past 40 years in the desert: "For this [the Torah] is not an empty (reik) thing for you, for it is your very life" (Devarim 32:47). This word "reik" is peculiar—what exactly does it mean for something to be "empty," and why, of all the ways Moshe could have described the Torah one final time to the Jewish People, does he choose to emphasize that it is not empty?

Commenting on this pasuk, the Kitzur Ba'al HaTurim notes that the word "reik" only appears twice in the entire Torah. Once in our pasuk, and once in a seemingly unrelated place: when the 11 brothers threw Yosef into the pit, it too is described as "reik" (Bereshis 37:24)! By examining the story of the pit, we can glean a deeper understanding of how "reik" illuminates our pasuk.

Distraught and agitated by Yosef's prophetic dreams, the brothers "took him and threw him into the pit" (Bereshis 37:24). The Torah then characterizes the pit as "empty; there was no water in it" (Bereshis 37:24). This is redundant: if the pit was empty, why tell us there was no water in it? Of course there was no water! Rashi explains, quoting the Gemara in Shabbos (22a), that while the pit had no water—and was empty in that regard—it did have snakes and scorpions.

But where did the Gemara get this from? Snakes and scorpions appear elsewhere, exactly once more in the Torah. When Moshe is reminding the people how Hashem cared for them in the desert, he enjoins them not to forget Hashem, "who led [them] through the great and terrible wilderness with its fiery snakes and scorpions, and parched land with no water, who brought forth water for you from the flinty rock" (Devarim 8:15). Here we have the snakes, the scorpions, and the lack of water—but what does this all mean? It's clearly similar to the situation of Yosef in the pit, but what is the connection telling us?

To answer this question, we have to turn to a seemingly unrelated area of halacha: Torah reading. The connection may not be immediately obvious. The Gemara in Bava Kamma (82a) describes how Ezra the Scribe instituted that the Torah should be read on Mondays and Thursdays, such that we should not go three days without Torah. But the Gemara challenges this: in fact, it claims, this practice was established earlier, and it sources this from a pasuk. After Yitzias Mitzrayim we read, "Moshe led Israel from the Red Sea, and they went out into the wilderness of Shur; they walked for three days in the wilderness and found no water" (Exodus 15:22). This has nothing to do with Torah reading! The Gemara continues with something fascinating. It explains that water here refers to Torah, quoting Isaiah who proclaims "All who are parched, come for water" (Isaiah 55:1). And this in turn relates back to our snakes and scorpions pasuk, which describes the wilderness as parched!

We're starting to put together a full picture. In the wilderness, the Jews had a choice between two realities. They saw snakes and scorpions, but they also had Moshe, and the Mishkan, and so much Torah. And Moshe is reminding them that not only did Hashem "bring forth the water," the water of Torah, but he also protected them from the "snakes and scorpions" through which the Jews had to pass.

However, here's a question: why did Hashem have to lead the Jews through the snakes and scorpions in the first place? Why not just keep the snakes and scorpions away? The answer is that sometimes you must walk through snakes and scorpions to reach water. Consider Yosef: without being thrown into the pit, would he have been sold to Potiphar, then thrown in jail, then called to interpret Pharaoh's dream, then made viceroy of the entire country of Egypt? Of course not! Without the snakes and the scorpions, one can't reach the water. As we learn in Pirkei Avot, "according to the suffering is the reward" (Pirkei Avot 5:23).

Unfortunately, we as humans are terrified of the snakes and the scorpions. We feel that we have been abandoned by Hashem, so to speak. But this is far from the truth, for even if Hashem doesn't seem as revealed to us at these moments, is He not there? Consider: in the entire Megillat Esther, the name of Hashem does not appear once. Was Hashem not there? Rather, we know that this shows us how even in the most dire of moments, when Haman is casting a lottery with the King's approval to kill the Jews, Hashem is operating in the background. This pattern appears in Yosef's story as well. Yosef being thrown into the pit was his Megillat Esther moment. Why? Because in the entire parsha of Yosef being thrown into the pit, the name of Hashem doesn't appear once. Yet even while Yosef was amidst the snakes and scorpions, without any water in sight, Hashem was operating in the background.

Perhaps this—this knowledge that Hashem is always working in the background—is why, of all words to use, Moshe describes the Torah as not "reik." Moshe is reminding the Jewish people that even during the snakes and scorpions, the emptiness, the "reik," Hashem is with them, and His Torah "is your very life" (Devarim 32:47). Moshe reminds us that those moments, when we feel that Hashem is as far away as possible, are the most crucial moments. Without the pit, without the wilderness, without the snakes and scorpions, without the emptiness, would we be here today?
